config-minimal-surface/kernel-config-chromeos-5.4/README.md, before:

## kernel config

In addition to Surface related kernel configs (search by SURFACE in `make menuconfig`), you need to change a lot to use on Surface Book 1 / Surface 3.

The `config` directory contains the actual generated config files.
TODO: create splitconfig.

```bash
Surface related kernel configs
- All items found by searching SURFACE
- SURFACE_SAM_SSH dependency:
  - SERIAL_8250
  - SERIAL_8250_DW
  - SERIAL_DEV_CTRL_TTYPORT

Cherry Trail related
- All items found by searching CHERRY, Crystal
- All items found by searching CHT except SND related things
- CONFIG_CRC_PMIC_OPREGION (not sure needed, but just in case)
- CHT_DC_TI_PMIC_OPREGION dependency:
  - PMIC_OPREGION
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC_CHTDC_TI
- CHT_WC_PMIC_OPREGION dependency:
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC_CHTWC
- EXTCON_INTEL_CHT_WC dependency:
  - EXTCON
- INTEL_CHT_INT33FE dependency:
  - REGULATOR
  - CHARGER_BQ24190
  - USB_ROLE_SWITCH # (new dependency on 5.4?)
    - USB_ROLES_INTEL_XHCI # (new dependency on 5.4?)
  - TYPEC_MUX_PI3USB30532 # (new dependency on 5.4?)
- GPIO_CRYSTAL_COVE dependency:
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC

Atom SoC sound related
# - CONFIG_SND_SST_ATOM_HIFI2_PLATFORM =m # (really needed?)
# - CONFIG_SND_SST_ATOM_HIFI2_PLATFORM_PCI =m # (really needed?)

Sound on Surface 3
- CONFIG_SND_SOC_INTEL_CHT_BSW_RT5645_MACH
- CONFIG_HDMI_LPE_AUDIO # needed for HDMI sound

Backlight control on Surface 3
- CONFIG_PWM
  - CONFIG_PWM_LPSS_PLATFORM
- CONFIG_PWM_CRC
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC
- DRM_I915 =m # (still need to be m on 5.4?)
  - INTEL_IPTS =m # (if exist)

For IPTS (if exist) on SB1 to work
- DRM_I915 =m
- INTEL_MEI_ME =m # (?)

Surface 3 S0ix
- INTEL_MEI_TXE
- CONFIG_INTEL_ATOMISP2_PM
- INTEL_INT0002_VGPIO # (?)

SB1 S0ix
- MEDIA_CONTROLLER
  - VIDEO_V4L2_SUBDEV_API
    - STAGING_MEDIA
      - CONFIG_VIDEO_IPU3_IMGU # need to be as module or embed the firmware to load the firmware
    - CONFIG_VIDEO_IPU3_CIO2
- CONFIG_INTEL_PCH_THERMAL

TPM (m if you want to use vTPM)
- CONFIG_TCG_TIS =m
- TCG_VTPM_PROXY =m
- CONFIG_TCG_CRB =m
- CONFIG_TCG_VIRTIO_VTPM =m

HID sensors
- HID_SENSOR_HUB
  - HID_SENSOR_IIO_COMMON
    - HID_SENSOR_ACCEL_3D
    - HID_SENSOR_ALS
    - HID_SENSOR_DEVICE_ROTATION
    - HID_SENSOR_GYRO_3D

Fix ACPI error on Surface 3
- SENSORS_CORETEMP =m # (still needed on 5.4?)

Embed firmware
#If you specify ipts firmwares here, remember to copy `/lib/firmware/intel/ipts` to your build machine.
#Or if you are in cros_sdk, `$HOME/chromiumos/chroot/build/amd64-generic/lib/firmware`.
#- CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE ='i915/skl_dmc_ver1_27.bin i915/skl_huc_ver01_07_1398.bin i915/skl_guc_ver9_33.bin intel/ipu3-fw.bin intel/ipts/config.bin intel/ipts/intel_desc.bin intel/ipts/vendor_desc.bin intel/ipts/vendor_kernel.bin intel/fw_sst_0f28.bin intel/fw_sst_0f28.bin-48kHz_i2s_master intel/fw_sst_0f28_ssp0.bin intel/fw_sst_22a8.bin'
# stopped embedding firmware except intel/ipu3-fw.bin for now
CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE ='intel/ipu3-fw.bin'
# - CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE_DIR ='/lib/firmware'
- CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE_DIR ='/build/amd64-generic/lib/firmware/' # if you are in cros_sdk

Fix HID related errors after s2idle (to reload module after suspend) # (still needed on 5.4?)
- I2C_HID =m
- USB_HID =m

Testing
- INTEL_PMC_IPC
# VirtualBox guest
    # [VirtualBox - Gentoo Wiki](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/VirtualBox#Kernel_configuration)
    - CONFIG_X86_SYSFB
    - CONFIG_DRM_FBDEV_EMULATION
    - CONFIG_FIRMWARE_EDID
    - CONFIG_FB_SIMPLE
# Surface series camera?
- CONFIG_MFD_TPS68470 =y
  - CONFIG_TPS68470_PMIC_OPREGION =y
  - CONFIG_GPIO_TPS68470 =y

Personal memo
- #if you patched to include acpi_call, don't forget to set it y or m
```

### misc configs from diff with Arch Linux kernel

```bash

Useful?
- CONFIG_HOTPLUG_PCI_ACPI
    - CONFIG_HOTPLUG_PCI_ACPI_IBM (at least m is enough; not all PC need this)
# - CONFIG_PWM_LPSS_PCI # not related to Surface 3
- CONFIG_DRM_I915_ALPHA_SUPPORT
- INPUT_SOC_BUTTON_ARRAY
- DYNAMIC_DEBUG
- ACPI_EC_DEBUGFS
- INTEL_POWERCLAMP
- CONFIG_DRM_I915_GVT
  - INTEL_IOMMU
  - INTEL_IOMMU_DEFAULT_ON is not set # kernel param is `intel_iommu=on`
  - VFIO
  - VFIO_MDEV
  - VFIO_MDEV_DEVICE
  - KVM
    - DRM_I915_GVT_KVMGT
  - CONFIG_KVM_INTEL
#   - CONFIG_KVM_AMD
  - CONFIG_VHOST_NET
  - VIRTIO_VSOCKETS
    - VHOST_VSOCK
    - VIRTIO_VSOCKETS_COMMON



Useful for some people?
- CONFIG_INTEL_MEI_WDT
- DPTF_POWER
- CONFIG_USB_NET_CDC_MBIM

# - HID_SENSOR_HUMIDITY
# - HID_SENSOR_INCLINOMETER_3D
# - HID_SENSOR_MAGNETOMETER_3D
# - HID_SENSOR_PRESS
# - HID_SENSOR_PROX
# - HID_SENSOR_TEMP
# - MTD_CMDLINE_PARTS
# - VT
#   - FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE
#   - FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_DETECT_PRIMARY
#   - CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_ROTATION
#   - CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_DEFERRED_TAKEOVER
#   - DRM_FBDEV_EMULATION
#   - DRM_KMS_FB_HELPER
# - CRYPTO_CRC32C_INTEL
# - CRYPTO_CRC32_PCLMUL
# - CRYPTO_CRCT10DIF_PCLMUL
# - CRYPTO_USER
# - EDAC
# - CRYPTO_GHASH_CLMUL_NI_INTEL
# - MTD
# - MTD_SPI_NOR
# - SPI_INTEL_SPI_PCI
# - SPI_INTEL_SPI_PLATFORM
# - CONFIG_USB_ROLE_SWITCH
#   - CONFIG_USB_ROLES_INTEL_XHCI
# - CONFIG_MACINTOSH_DRIVERS
#   - MAC_EMUMOUSEBTN
# - CRYPTO_PCBC
# - X86_PCC_CPUFREQ
# - CONFIG_TRANSPARENT_HUGEPAGE
# - CONFIG_USBIP_CORE
# - CONFIG_VIDEO_VIVID
# - CONFIG_VLAN_8021Q
# - CONFIG_CIFS
# - CONFIG_AUTOFS4_FS
# - CONFIG_AUTOFS_FS
```

Commit message:

Update regarding CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE
Signed-off-by: Tsuchiya Yuto (kitakar5525) <kitakar@gmail.com>

config-minimal-surface/kernel-config-chromeos-5.4/README.md, after:

## kernel config

In addition to Surface related kernel configs (search by SURFACE in `make menuconfig`), you need to change a lot to use on Surface Book 1 / Surface 3.

The `config` directory contains the actual generated config files.
TODO: create splitconfig.

```bash
Surface related kernel configs
- All items found by searching SURFACE
- SURFACE_SAM_SSH dependency:
  - SERIAL_8250
  - SERIAL_8250_DW
  - SERIAL_DEV_CTRL_TTYPORT

Cherry Trail related
- All items found by searching CHERRY, Crystal
- All items found by searching CHT except SND related things
- CONFIG_CRC_PMIC_OPREGION (not sure needed, but just in case)
- CHT_DC_TI_PMIC_OPREGION dependency:
  - PMIC_OPREGION
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC_CHTDC_TI
- CHT_WC_PMIC_OPREGION dependency:
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC_CHTWC
- EXTCON_INTEL_CHT_WC dependency:
  - EXTCON
- INTEL_CHT_INT33FE dependency:
  - REGULATOR
  - CHARGER_BQ24190
  - USB_ROLE_SWITCH # (new dependency on 5.4?)
    - USB_ROLES_INTEL_XHCI # (new dependency on 5.4?)
  - TYPEC_MUX_PI3USB30532 # (new dependency on 5.4?)
- GPIO_CRYSTAL_COVE dependency:
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC

Atom SoC sound related
# - CONFIG_SND_SST_ATOM_HIFI2_PLATFORM =m # (really needed?)
# - CONFIG_SND_SST_ATOM_HIFI2_PLATFORM_PCI =m # (really needed?)

Sound on Surface 3
- CONFIG_SND_SOC_INTEL_CHT_BSW_RT5645_MACH
- CONFIG_HDMI_LPE_AUDIO # needed for HDMI sound

Backlight control on Surface 3
- CONFIG_PWM
  - CONFIG_PWM_LPSS_PLATFORM
- CONFIG_PWM_CRC
  - INTEL_SOC_PMIC
- DRM_I915 =m # (still need to be m on 5.4?)
  - INTEL_IPTS =m # (if exist)

For IPTS (if exist) on SB1 to work
- DRM_I915 =m
- INTEL_MEI_ME =m # (?)

Surface 3 S0ix
- INTEL_MEI_TXE
- CONFIG_INTEL_ATOMISP2_PM
- INTEL_INT0002_VGPIO # (?)

SB1 S0ix
- MEDIA_CONTROLLER
  - VIDEO_V4L2_SUBDEV_API
    - STAGING_MEDIA
      - CONFIG_VIDEO_IPU3_IMGU # need to be as module or embed the firmware to load the firmware
    - CONFIG_VIDEO_IPU3_CIO2
- CONFIG_INTEL_PCH_THERMAL

TPM (m if you want to use vTPM)
- CONFIG_TCG_TIS =m
- TCG_VTPM_PROXY =m
- CONFIG_TCG_CRB =m
- CONFIG_TCG_VIRTIO_VTPM =m

HID sensors
- HID_SENSOR_HUB
  - HID_SENSOR_IIO_COMMON
    - HID_SENSOR_ACCEL_3D
    - HID_SENSOR_ALS
    - HID_SENSOR_DEVICE_ROTATION
    - HID_SENSOR_GYRO_3D

Fix ACPI error on Surface 3
- SENSORS_CORETEMP =m # (still needed on 5.4?)

# Embedding firmware files
# https://github.com/kitakar5525/chromeos-kernel-linux-surface/issues/21
# If built-in drivers use firmware file, you may need to specify the file here.
# That said, I recommend just building the driver as module... I think it's simpler.
# add required firmware here:
# CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE =''
# - CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE_DIR ='/lib/firmware'
# - CONFIG_EXTRA_FIRMWARE_DIR ='/build/amd64-generic/lib/firmware/' # if you are in cros_sdk

Fix HID related errors after s2idle (to reload module after suspend) # (still needed on 5.4?)
- I2C_HID =m
- USB_HID =m

Testing
- INTEL_PMC_IPC
# VirtualBox guest
    # [VirtualBox - Gentoo Wiki](https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/VirtualBox#Kernel_configuration)
    - CONFIG_X86_SYSFB
    - CONFIG_DRM_FBDEV_EMULATION
    - CONFIG_FIRMWARE_EDID
    - CONFIG_FB_SIMPLE
# Surface series camera?
- CONFIG_MFD_TPS68470 =y
  - CONFIG_TPS68470_PMIC_OPREGION =y
  - CONFIG_GPIO_TPS68470 =y

Personal memo
- #if you patched to include acpi_call, don't forget to set it y or m
```

### misc configs from diff with Arch Linux kernel

```bash

Useful?
- CONFIG_HOTPLUG_PCI_ACPI
    - CONFIG_HOTPLUG_PCI_ACPI_IBM (at least m is enough; not all PC need this)
# - CONFIG_PWM_LPSS_PCI # not related to Surface 3
- CONFIG_DRM_I915_ALPHA_SUPPORT
- INPUT_SOC_BUTTON_ARRAY
- DYNAMIC_DEBUG
- ACPI_EC_DEBUGFS
- INTEL_POWERCLAMP
- CONFIG_DRM_I915_GVT
  - INTEL_IOMMU
  - INTEL_IOMMU_DEFAULT_ON is not set # kernel param is `intel_iommu=on`
  - VFIO
  - VFIO_MDEV
  - VFIO_MDEV_DEVICE
  - KVM
    - DRM_I915_GVT_KVMGT
  - CONFIG_KVM_INTEL
#   - CONFIG_KVM_AMD
  - CONFIG_VHOST_NET
  - VIRTIO_VSOCKETS
    - VHOST_VSOCK
    - VIRTIO_VSOCKETS_COMMON



Useful for some people?
- CONFIG_INTEL_MEI_WDT
- DPTF_POWER
- CONFIG_USB_NET_CDC_MBIM

# - HID_SENSOR_HUMIDITY
# - HID_SENSOR_INCLINOMETER_3D
# - HID_SENSOR_MAGNETOMETER_3D
# - HID_SENSOR_PRESS
# - HID_SENSOR_PROX
# - HID_SENSOR_TEMP
# - MTD_CMDLINE_PARTS
# - VT
#   - FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE
#   - FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_DETECT_PRIMARY
#   - CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_ROTATION
#   - CONFIG_FRAMEBUFFER_CONSOLE_DEFERRED_TAKEOVER
#   - DRM_FBDEV_EMULATION
#   - DRM_KMS_FB_HELPER
# - CRYPTO_CRC32C_INTEL
# - CRYPTO_CRC32_PCLMUL
# - CRYPTO_CRCT10DIF_PCLMUL
# - CRYPTO_USER
# - EDAC
# - CRYPTO_GHASH_CLMUL_NI_INTEL
# - MTD
# - MTD_SPI_NOR
# - SPI_INTEL_SPI_PCI
# - SPI_INTEL_SPI_PLATFORM
# - CONFIG_USB_ROLE_SWITCH
#   - CONFIG_USB_ROLES_INTEL_XHCI
# - CONFIG_MACINTOSH_DRIVERS
#   - MAC_EMUMOUSEBTN
# - CRYPTO_PCBC
# - X86_PCC_CPUFREQ
# - CONFIG_TRANSPARENT_HUGEPAGE
# - CONFIG_USBIP_CORE
# - CONFIG_VIDEO_VIVID
# - CONFIG_VLAN_8021Q
# - CONFIG_CIFS
# - CONFIG_AUTOFS4_FS
# - CONFIG_AUTOFS_FS
```
